THE OLD ISSUE [Page 1] OCTOBER 9, 1899 _Here is nothing new nor aught unproven, say the Trumpets, Many feet have worn it and the road is old indeed. It is the King--the King we schooled aforetime! (Trumpets in the marshes--in the eyot at Runnymede!)_ _Here is neither haste, nor hate, nor anger, peal the Trumpets, Pardon for his penitence or pity for his fall. It is the King!--inexorable Trumpets-- (Trumpets round the scaffold at the dawning by Whitehall!)_ * * * * * _He hath veiled the crown and hid the sceptre, warn the Trumpets, He hath changed the fashion of the lies that cloak his will. Hard die the Kings--ah hard--dooms hard! declare the Trumpets, Trumpets at the gang-plank where the brawling troop-decks fill!_ _Ancient and Unteachable, abide--abide the trumpets! Once again the Trumpets, for the shuddering ground-swell brings Clamour over ocean of the harsh pursuing Trumpets-- Trumpets of the Vanguard that have sworn no truce with Kings!_ All we have of freedom, all we use or know-- This our fathers bought for us long and long ago. Ancient Right unnoticed as the breath we draw-- Leave to live by no mans leave, underneath the Law. Lance and torch and tumult, steel and grey-goose wing Wrenched it, inch and ell and all, slowly from the King. Till our fathers stablished, after bloody years, How our King is one with us, first among his peers. So they bought us freedom--not at little cost-- Wherefore must we watch the King, lest our gain be lost. Over all things certain, this is sure indeed, Suffer not the old King: for we know the breed. Give no ear to bondsmen bidding us endure, Whining He is weak and far; crying Time shall cure. (Time himself is witness, till the battle joins, Deeper strikes the rottenness in the peoples loins.) Give no heed to bondsmen masking war with peace. Suffer not the old King here or overseas. They that beg us barter--wait his yielding mood-- Pledge the years we hold in trust--pawn our brothers blood-- Howso great their clamour, whatsoer their claim, Suffer not the old King under any name! Here is naught unproven--here is naught to learn. It is written what shall fall if the King return. He shall mark our goings, question whence we came, Set his guards about us, as in Freedoms name. He shall take a tribute, toll of all our ware; He shall change our gold for arms--arms we may not bear. He shall break his Judges if they cross his word; He shall rule above the Law calling on the Lord. He shall peep and mutter; and the night shall bring Watchers neath our window, lest we mock the King-- Hate and all division; hosts of hurrying spies; Money poured in secret, carrion breeding flies. Strangers of his council, hirelings of his pay, These shall deal our Justice: sell--deny--delay. We shall drink dishonour, we shall eat abuse For the Land we look to--for the Tongue we use. We shall take our station, dirt beneath his feet, While his hired captains jeer us in the street. Cruel in the shadow, crafty in the sun, Far beyond his borders shall his teachings run. Sloven, sullen, savage, secret, uncontrolled-- Laying on a new land evil of the old; Long-forgotten bondage, dwarfing heart and brain-- All our fathers died to loose he shall bind again. _Here is naught at venture, random nor untrue-- Swings the wheel full-circle, brims the cup anew._ _Here is naught unproven, here is nothing hid: Step for step and word for word--so the old Kings did!_ _Step by step and word by word: who is ruled may read. Suffer not the old Kings--for we know the breed--_ _All the right they promise--all the wrong they bring. Stewards of the Judgment, suffer not this King!_ BRIDGE-GUARD IN THE KARROO [Page 8] and will supply details to guard the Blood River Bridge. _District Orders--Lines of Communication._ Sudden the desert changes, The raw glare softens and clings, Till the aching Oudtshoorn ranges Stand up like the thrones of kings-- Ramparts of slaughter and peril-- Blazing, amazing--aglow Twixt the sky-lines belting beryl And the wine-dark flats below. Royal the pageant closes, Lit by the last of the sun-- Opal and ash-of-roses, Cinnamon, umber, and dun. The twilight swallows the thicket, The starlight reveals the ridge; The whistle shrills to the picket-- We are changing guard on the bridge. (Few, forgotten and lonely, Where the empty metals shine-- No, not combatants--only Details guarding the line.) We slip through the broken panel Of fence by the gangers shed; We drop to the waterless channel And the lean track overhead; We stumble on refuse of rations, The beef and the biscuit-tins; We take our appointed stations, And the endless night begins. We hear the Hottentot herders As the sheep click past to the fold-- And the click of the restless girders As the steel contracts in the cold-- Voices of jackals calling And, loud in the hush between, A morsel of dry earth falling From the flanks of the scarred ravine. And the solemn firmament marches, And the hosts of heaven rise Framed through the iron arches-- Banded and barred by the ties, Till we feel the far track humming, And we see her headlight plain, And we gather and wait her coming-- The wonderful north-bound train. (Few, forgotten and lonely, Where the white car-windows shine-- No, not combatants--only Details guarding the line.) Quick, ere the gift escape us! Out of the darkness we reach For a handful of week-old papers And a mouthful of human speech. And the monstrous heaven rejoices, And the earth allows again, Meetings, greetings, and voices Of women talking with men. So we return to our places, As out on the bridge she rolls; And the darkness covers our faces, And the darkness re-enters our souls. More than a little lonely Where the lessening tail-lights shine. No--not combatants--only Details guarding the line! THE LESSON [Page 13] (18991902) _Let us admit it fairly, as a business people should, We have had no end of a lesson: it will do us no end of good._ Not on a single issue, or in one direction or twain, But conclusively, comprehensively, and several times and again, Were all our most holy illusions knocked higher than Gilderoys kite. We have had a jolly good lesson, and it serves us jolly well right! This was not bestowd us under the trees, nor yet in the shade of a tent, But swingingly, over eleven degrees of a bare brown continent. From Lamberts to Delagoa Bay, and from Pietersburg to Sutherland, Fell the phenomenal lesson we learned--with a fulness accorded no other land. It was our fault, and our very great fault, and _not_ the judgment of Heaven. We made an Army in our own image, on an island nine by seven, Which faithfully mirrored its makers ideals, equipment, and mental attitude-- And so we got our lesson: and we ought to accept it with gratitude. We have spent two hundred million pounds to prove the fact once more, That horses are quicker than men afoot, since two and two make four: And horses have four legs, and men have two legs, and two into four goes twice, And nothing over except our lesson--and very cheap at the price. For remember (this our children shall know: we are too near for that knowledge) Not our mere astonied camps, but Council and Creed and College-- All the obese, unchallenged old things that stifle and overlie us-- Have felt the effects of the lesson we got--an advantage no money could buy us! Then let us develop this marvellous asset which we alone command, And which, it may subsequently transpire, will be worth as much as the Rand: Let us approach this pivotal fact in a humble yet hopeful mood-- We have had no end of a lesson: it will do us no end of good! It was our fault, and our very great fault--and now we must turn it to use; We have forty million reasons for failure, but not a single excuse! So the more we work and the less we talk the better results we shall get-- We have had an Imperial lesson; it may make us an Empire yet! THE FILES [Page 17] (THE SUB-EDITOR SPEAKS) Files-- The Files-- Office Files! Oblige me by referring to the files. Every question man can raise, Every phrase of every phase Of that question is on record in the files-- (Threshed out threadbare--fought and finished in the files). Ere the Universe at large Was our new-tipped arrows targe-- Ere we rediscovered Mammon and his wiles-- Faenza, gentle reader, spent her--five-and-twentieth leader (You will find him, and some others, in the files). Warn all future Robert Brownings and Carlyles, It will interest them to hunt among the files, Where unvisited, a-cold, Lie the crowded years of old In that Kensall-Green of greatness called the files-- (In our newspaPre-la-Chaise the office files), Where the dead men lay them down Meekly sure of long renown, And above them, sere and swift, Packs the daily deepening drift Of the all-recording, all-effacing files-- The obliterating, automatic files. Count the mighty men who slung Ink, Evangel, Sword, or Tongue When Reform and you were young-- Made their boasts and spake according in the files-- (Hear the ghosts that wake applauding in the files!) Trace each all-forgot career From long primer through brevier Unto Death, a para minion in the files (Para minion--solid--bottom of the files).... Some successful Kings and Queens adorn the files, They were great, their views were leaded, And their deaths were triple-headed, So they catch the eye in running through the files (Show as blazes in the mazes of the files); For their paramours and priests, And their gross, jack-booted feasts, And their epoch-marking actions see the files. Was it Bomba fled the blue Sicilian isles? Was it Saffi, a professor Once of Oxford, brought redress or Garibaldi? Who remembers Forty-odd-year old Septembers?-- Only sextons paid to dig among the files (Such as I am, born and bred among the files). You must hack through much deposit Ere you know for sure who was it Came to burial with such honour in the files (Only seven seasons back beneath the files). Very great our loss and grievous-- So our best and brightest leave us, And it ends the Age of Giants, say the files; All the 60--70--80--90 files (The open-minded, opportunist files-- The easy O King, live for ever files). It is good to read a little in the files; Tis a sure and sovereign balm Unto philosophic calm, Yea, and philosophic doubt when Life beguiles. When you know Success is Greatness, When you marvel at your lateness In apprehending facts so plain to Smiles (Self-helpful, wholly strenuous Samuel Smiles). When your Imp of Blind Desire Bids you set the Thames afire, Youll remember men have done so--in the files. Youll have seen those flames transpire--in the files (More than once that flood has run so--in the files). When the Conchimarian horns Of the reboantic Norns Usher gentlemen and ladies With new lights on Heaven and Hades, Guaranteeing to Eternity All yesterdays modernity; When Brocken-spectres made by Some ones breath on ink parade by, Very earnest and tremendous, Let not shows of shows offend us. When of everything we like we Shout ecstatic:--_Quod ubique, Quod ab omnibus_ means _semper!_ Oh, my brother, keep your temper! Light your pipe and take a look along the files! Youve a better chance to guess At the meaning of Success (Which is Greatness--_vide_ press) When youve seen it in perspective in the files. THE REFORMERS [Page 23] _Not in the camp his victory lies Or triumph in the market-place, Who is his Nations sacrifice To turn the judgment from his race._ Happy is he who, bred and taught By sleek, sufficing Circumstance-- Whose Gospel was the apparelled thought, Whose Gods were Luxury and Chance-- Sees, on the threshold of his days, The old life shrivel like a scroll, And to unheralded dismays Submits his body and his soul; The fatted shows wherein he stood Foregoing, and the idiot pride, That he may prove with his own blood All that his easy sires denied-- Ultimate issues, primal springs, Demands, abasements, penalties-- The imperishable plinth of things Seen and unseen, that touch our peace. For, though ensnaring ritual dim His vision through the after-years, Yet virtue shall go out of him: Example profiting his peers. With great things charged he shall not hold Aloof till great occasion rise, But serve, full-harnessed, as of old, The days that are the destinies. He shall forswear and put away The idols of his sheltered house; And to Necessity shall pay Unflinching tribute of his vows. He shall not plead anothers act, Nor bind him in anothers oath To weigh the Word above the Fact, Or make or take excuse for sloth. The yoke he bore shall press him still, And long-ingrained effort goad To find, to fashion, and fulfil The cleaner life, the sterner code. _Not in the camp his victory lies-- The world (unheeding his return) Shall see it in his childrens eyes And from his grandsons lips shall learn!_ DIRGE OF DEAD SISTERS [Page 26] Who recalls the twilight and the ranged tents in order (Violet peaks uplifted through the crystal evening air?) And the clink of iron teacups and the piteous, noble laughter, And the faces of the Sisters with the dust upon their hair? (Now and not hereafter, while the breath is in our nostrils, Now and not hereafter, ere the meaner years go by-- Let us now remember many honourable women, Such as bade us turn again when we were like to die.) Who recalls the morning and the thunder through the foothills (Tufts of fleecy shrapnel strung along the empty plains?) And the sun-scarred Red-Cross coaches creeping guarded to the culvert, And the faces of the Sisters looking gravely from the trains? (When the days were torment and the nights were clouded terror, When the Powers of Darkness had dominion on our soul-- When we fled consuming through the Seven Hells of fever, These put out their hands to us and healed and made us whole.) Who recalls the midnight by the bridges wrecked abutment (Autumn rain that rattled like a Maxim on the tin?) And the lightning-dazzled levels and the streaming, straining wagons, And the faces of the Sisters as they bore the wounded in? (Till the pain was merciful and stunned us into silence-- When each nerve cried out on God that made the misused clay; When the Body triumphed and the last poor shame departed-- These abode our agonies and wiped the sweat away.) Who recalls the noontide and the funerals through the market (Blanket-hidden bodies, flagless, followed by the flies?) And the footsore firing-party, and the dust and stench and staleness, And the faces of the Sisters and the glory in their eyes? (Bold behind the battle, in the open camp all-hallowed, Patient, wise, and mirthful in the ringed and reeking town, These endured unresting till they rested from their labours-- Little wasted bodies, ah, so light to lower down!) Yet their graves are scattered and their names are clean forgotten, Earth shall not remember, but the Waiting Angel knows Them that died at Uitvlugt when the plague was on the city-- Her that fell at Simons Town in service on our foes. _Wherefore we they ransomed, while the breath is in our nostrils, Now and not hereafter, ere the meaner years go by, Praise with love and worship many honourable women, Those that gave their lives for us when we were like to die!_ THE ISLANDERS [Page 31] _No doubt but ye are the People--your throne is above the Kings. Whoso speaks in your presence must say acceptable things: Bowing the head in worship, bending the knee in fear-- Bringing the word well smoothen--such as a King should hear._ Fenced by your careful fathers, ringed by your leaden seas, Long did ye wake in quiet and long lie down at ease; Till ye said of Strife, What is it? of the Sword, It is far from our ken; Till ye made a sport of your shrunken hosts and a toy of your armed men. Ye stopped your ears to the warning--ye would neither look nor heed-- Ye set your leisure before their toil and your lusts above their need. Because of your witless learning and your beasts of warren and chase, Ye grudged your sons to their service and your fields for their camping-place. Ye forced them glean in the highways the straw for the bricks they brought; Ye forced them follow in byways the craft that ye never taught. Ye hindered and hampered and crippled; ye thrust out of sight and away Those that would serve you for honour and those that served you for pay. Then were the judgments loosened; then was your shame revealed, At the hands of a little people, few but apt in the field. Yet ye were saved by a remnant (and your lands long-suffering Star), When your strong men cheered in their millions while your striplings went to the war. Sons of the sheltered city--unmade, unhandled, unmeet-- Ye pushed them raw to the battle as ye picked them raw from the street. And what did ye look they should compass? War-craft learned in a breath, Knowledge unto occasion at the first far view of Death? So! And ye train your horses and the dogs ye feed and prize? How are the beasts more worthy than the souls your sacrifice? But ye said, Their valour shall show them; but ye said, The end is close. And ye sent them comfits and pictures to help them harry your foes, And ye vaunted your fathomless power, and ye flaunted your iron pride, Ere--ye fawned on the Younger Nations for the men who could shoot and ride! Then ye returned to your trinkets; then ye contented your souls With the flannelled fools at the wicket or the muddied oafs at the goals. Given to strong delusion, wholly believing a lie, Ye saw that the land lay fenceless, and ye let the months go by Waiting some easy wonder: hoping some saving sign-- Idle--openly idle--in the lee of the forespent Line. Idle--except for your boasting--and what is your boasting worth If ye grudge a year of service to the lordliest life on earth? Ancient, effortless, ordered, cycle on cycle set, Life so long untroubled, that ye who inherit forget It was not made with the mountains, it is not one with the deep. Men, not gods, devised it. Men, not gods, must keep. Men, not children, servants, or kinsfolk called from afar, But each man born in the Island broke to the matter of war. Soberly and by custom taken and trained for the same; Each man born in the Island entered at youth to the game-- As it were almost cricket, not to be mastered in haste, But after trial and labour, by temperance, living chaste. As it were almost cricket--as it were even your play, Weighed and pondered and worshipped, and practised day and day. So ye shall bide sure-guarded when the restless lightnings wake In the womb of the blotting war-cloud, and the pallid nations quake. So, at the haggard trumpets, instant your soul shall leap Forthright, accoutred, accepting--alert from the wells of sleep. So at the threat ye shall summon--so at the need ye shall send Men, not children or servants, tempered and taught to the end; Cleansed of servile panic, slow to dread or despise, Humble because of knowledge, mighty by sacrifice. But ye say, It will mar our comfort. Ye say, It will minish our trade. Do ye wait for the spattered shrapnel ere ye learn how a gun is laid? For the low, red glare to southward when the raided coast-towns burn? (Light ye shall have on that lesson, but little time to learn.) Will ye pitch some white pavilion, and lustily even the odds, With nets and hoops and mallets, with rackets and bats and rods? Will the rabbit war with your foemen--the red deer horn them for hire? Your kept cock-pheasant keep you?--he is master of many a shire. Arid, aloof, incurious, unthinking, unthanking, gelt, Will ye loose your schools to flout them till their brow-beat columns melt? Will ye pray them or preach them, or print them, or ballot them back from your shore? Will your workmen issue a mandate to bid them strike no more? Will ye rise and dethrone your rulers? (Because ye were idle both? Pride by insolence chastened? Indolence purged by sloth?) No doubt but ye are the People; who shall make you afraid? Also your gods are many; no doubt but your gods shall aid. Idols of greasy altars built for the bodys ease; Proud little brazen Baals and talking fetishes; Teraphs of sept and party and wise wood-pavement gods-- _These_ shall come down to the battle and snatch you from under the rods? From the gusty, flickering gun-roll with viewless salvoes rent, And the pitted hail of the bullets that tell not whence they were sent. When ye are ringed as with iron, when ye are scourged as with whips, When the meat is yet in your belly, and the boast is yet on your lips; When ye go forth at morning and the noon beholds you broke, Ere ye lie down at even, your remnant, under the yoke. _No doubt but ye are the People--absolute, strong, and wise; Whatever your heart has desired ye have not withheld from your eyes. On your own heads, in your own hands, the sin and the saving lies!_ THE PEACE OF DIVES [Page 40] The Word came down to Dives in Torment where he lay: Our World is full of wickedness, My Children maim and slay, And the Saint and Seer and Prophet Can make no better of it Than to sanctify and prophesy and pray. Rise up, rise up, thou Dives, and take again thy gold, And thy women and thy housen as they were to thee of old. It may be grace hath found thee In the furnace where We bound thee, And that thou shalt bring the peace My Son foretold. Then merrily rose Dives and leaped from out his fire, And walked abroad with diligence to do the Lords desire; And anon the battles ceased, And the captives were released, And Earth had rest from Goshen to Gadire. The Word came down to Satan that raged and roared alone, Mid the shouting of the peoples by the cannon overthrown (But the Prophets, Saints, and Seers Set each other by the ears, For each would claim the marvel as his own): Rise up, rise up, thou Satan, upon the Earth to go, And prove the peace of Dives if it be good or no: For all that he hath planned We deliver to thy hand, As thy skill shall serve to break it or bring low. Then mightily rose Satan, and about the Earth he hied, And breathed on Kings in idleness and Princes drunk with pride; But for all the wrong he breathed There was never sword unsheathed, And the fires he lighted flickered out and died. Then terribly rose Satan, and he darkened Earth afar, Till he came on cunning Dives where the money-changers are; And he saw men pledge their gear For the gold that buys the spear, And the helmet and the habergeon of war. Yea to Dives came the Persian and the Syrian and the Mede-- And their hearts were nothing altered, nor their cunning nor their greed-- And they pledged their flocks and farms For the king-compelling arms, And Dives lent according to their need. Then Satan said to Dives:--Return again with me, Who hast broken His Commandment in the day He set thee free, Who grindest for thy greed, Mans belly-pinch and need; And the blood of Man to filthy usury! Then softly answered Dives where the money-changers sit:-- My refuge is Our Master, O My Master in the Pit; But behold all Earth is laid In the peace which I have made, And behold I wait on thee to trouble it! Then angrily turned Satan, and about the Seas he fled, To shake the new-sown peoples with insult, doubt, and dread; But for all the sleight he used There was never squadron loosed, And the brands he flung flew dying and fell dead. Yet to Dives came Atlantis and the Captains of the West-- And their hates were nothing weakened nor their anger nor unrest-- And they pawned their utmost trade For the dry, decreeing blade; And Dives lent and took of them their best. Then Satan said to Dives:--Declare thou by The Name, The secret of thy subtlety that turneth mine to shame. It is known through all the Hells How my peoples mocked my spells, And my faithless Kings denied me ere I came. Then answered cunning Dives: Do not gold and hate abide At the heart of every Magic, yea, and senseless fear beside? With gold and fear and hate I have harnessed state to state, And with hate and fear and gold their hates are tied. For hate men seek a weapon, for fear they seek a shield-- Keener blades and broader targes than their frantic neighbours wield-- For gold I arm their hands, And for gold I buy their lands, And for gold I sell their enemies the yield. Their nearest foes may purchase, or their furthest friends may lease, One by one from Ancient Accad to the Islands of the Seas. And their covenants they make For the naked irons sake, But I--I trap them armoured into peace. The flocks that Egypt pledged me to Assyria I drave, And Pharaoh hath the increase of the herds that Sargon gave. Not for Ashdod overthrown Will the Kings destroy their own, Or their peoples wake the strife they feign to brave. Is not Calno like Carchemish? For the steeds of their desire They have sold me seven harvests that I sell to Crowning Tyre; And the Tyrian sweeps the plains With a thousand hired wains, And the Cities keep the peace and--share the hire. Hast thou seen the pride of Moab? For the swords about his path, His bond is to Philistia, in half of all he hath. And he dare not draw the sword Till Gaza give the word, And he show release from Askalon and Gath. Wilt thou call again thy peoples, wilt thou craze anew thy Kings? Lo! my lightnings pass before thee, and their whistling servant brings, Ere the drowsy street hath stirred-- Every masked and midnight word, And the nations break their fast upon these things. So I make a jest of Wonder, and a mock of Time and Space, The roofless Seas an hostel, and the Earth a market-place, Where the anxious traders know Each is surety for his foe, And none may thrive without his fellows grace. Now this is all my subtlety and this is all my wit, God give thee good enlightenment, My Master in the Pit. But behold all Earth is laid In the peace which I have made, And behold I wait on thee to trouble it! SOUTH AFRICA [Page 49] Lived a woman wonderful, (May the Lord amend her!) Neither simple, kind, nor true, But her Pagan beauty drew Christian gentlemen a few Hotly to attend her. _Christian gentlemen a few From Berwick unto Dover; For she was South Africa, And she was South Africa, She was our South Africa, Africa all over!_ Half her land was dead with drouth, Half was red with battle; She was fenced with fire and sword, Plague on pestilence outpoured, Locusts on the greening sward And murrain on the cattle! _True, ah true, and overtrue; That is why we love her! For she is South Africa, And she is South Africa, She is our South Africa, Africa all over!_ Bitter hard her lovers toiled, Scandalous their payment,-- Food forgot on trains derailed; Cattle-dung where fuel failed; Water where the mules had staled; And sackcloth for their raiment! So she filled their mouths with dust And their bones with fever; Greeted them with cruel lies; Treated them despiteful-wise; Meted them calamities Till they vowed to leave her. They took ship and they took sail, Raging, from her borders,-- In a little, none the less, They forgat their sore duresse, They forgave her waywardness And returned for orders! They esteemed her favour more Than a Thrones foundation. For the glory of her face Bade farewell to breed and race-- Yea, and made their burial-place Altar of a Nation! Wherefore, being bought by blood, And by blood restord To the arms that nearly lost, She, because of all she cost, Stands, a very woman, most Perfect and adord! _On your feet, and let them know This is why we love her! For she is South Africa, She is our South Africa, Is our own South Africa, Africa all over!_ THE SETTLER [Page 53] Here, where my fresh-turned furrows run, And the deep soil glistens red, I will repair the wrong that was done To the living and the dead. Here, where the senseless bullet fell, And the barren shrapnel burst, I will plant a tree, I will dig a well, Against the heat and the thirst. Here, in a large and a sunlit land, Where no wrong bites to the bone, I will lay my hand in my neighbours hand, And together we will atone For the set folly and the red breach And the black waste of it all, Giving and taking counsel each Over the cattle-kraal. Here will we join against our foes-- The hailstroke and the storm, And the red and rustling cloud that blows The locusts mile-deep swarm; Frost and murrain and floods let loose Shall launch us side by side In the holy wars that have no truce Twixt seed and harvest tide. Earth, where we rode to slay or be slain, Our love shall redeem unto life; We will gather and lead to her lips again The waters of ancient strife, From the far and the fiercely guarded streams And the pools where we lay in wait, Till the corn cover our evil dreams And the young corn our hate. And when we bring old fights to mind, We will not remember the sin-- If there be blood on his head of my kind, Or blood on my head of his kin-- For the ungrazed upland, the untilled lea Cry, and the fields forlorn: The dead must bury their dead, but ye-- Ye serve an host unborn. Bless then, our God, the new-yoked plough And the good beasts that draw, And the bread we eat in the sweat of our brow According to Thy Law. After us cometh a multitude-- Prosper the work of our hands, That we may feed with our lands food The folk of all our lands! Here, in the waves and the troughs of the plains, Where the healing stillness lies, And the vast, benignant sky restrains And the long days make wise-- Bless to our use the rain and the sun And the blind seed in its bed, That we may repair the wrong that was done To the living and the dead! SERVICE SONGS [Page 58] _Tommy you was when it began, But now that it is oer You shall be called The Service Man Enceforward, evermore._ _Battry, brigade, flank, centre, van, Defaulter, Army corps-- From first to last The Service Man Enceforward, evermore._ _From Alifax to Industan, From York to Singapore-- Orse, foot, an guns, The Service Man Enceforward, evermore!_ CHANT-PAGAN [Page 59] ENGLISH IRREGULAR: 9902 Me that ave been what Ive been, Me that ave gone where Ive gone, Me that ave seen what Ive seen-- Ow can I ever take on With awful old England again, An ouses both sides of the street, And edges two sides of the lane, And the parson an gentry between, An touchin my at when we meet-- Me that ave been what Ive been? Me that ave watched arf a world Eave up all shiny with dew, Kopje on kop to the sun, An as soon as the mist let em through Our elios winkin like fun-- Three sides of a ninety-mile square, Over valleys as big as a shire-- _Are ye there? Are ye there? Are ye there?_ An then the blind drum of our fire ... An Im rollin is lawns for the Squire, Me! Me that ave rode through the dark Forty mile often on end, Along the Maollisberg Range, With only the stars for my mark An only the night for my friend, An things runnin off as you pass, An things jumpin up in the grass, An the silence, the shine an the size Of the igh, inexpressible skies.... I am takin some letters almost As much as a mile, to the post, An mind you come back with the change! Me! Me that saw Barberton took When we dropped through the clouds on their ead, An they ove the guns over and fled-- Me that was through Dimond Ill, An Pieters an Springs an Belfast-- From Dundee to Vereeniging all! Me that stuck out to the last (An five bloomin bars on my chest)-- I am doin my Sunday-school best, By the elp of the Squire an his wife (Not to mention the ousemaid an cook), To come in an ands up an be still, An honestly work for my bread, My livin in that state of life To which it shall please God to call Me! Me that ave followed my trade In the place where the lightnins are made, Twixt the Rains and the Sun and the Moon; Me that lay down an got up Three years an the sky for my roof-- That ave ridden my unger an thirst Six thousand raw mile on the hoof, With the Vaal and the Orange for cup, An the Brandwater Basin for dish,-- Oh! its ard to beave as they wish, (Too ard, an a little too soon), Ill ave to think over it first-- Me! I will arise an get ence;-- I will trek South and make sure If its only my fancy or not That the sunshine of England is pale, And the breezes of England are stale, An theres somethin gone small with the lot; For _I_ know of a sun an a wind, An some plains and a mountain beind, An some graves by a barb-wire fence; An a Dutchman Ive fought oo might give Me a job were I ever inclined, To look in an offsaddle an live Where theres neither a road nor a tree-- But only my Maker an me, And I think it will kill me or cure, So I think I will go there an see. M. I. [Page 64] (MOUNTED INFANTRY OF THE LINE) I wish my mother could see me now, with a fence-post under my arm, And a knife and a spoon in my putties that I found on a Boer farm, Atop of a sore-backed Argentine, with a thirst that you couldnt buy. I used to be in the Yorkshires once (Sussex, Lincolns, and Rifles once), Hampshires, Glosters, and Scottish once! (_ad lib._) But now I am M. I. That is what we are known as--that is the name you must call If you want officers servants, pickets an orse-guards an all-- Details for buryin-parties, company-cooks or supply-- Turn out the chronic Ikonas! Roll up the ----[1] M. I.! My ands are spotty with veldt-sores, my shirt is a button an frill, An the things Ive used my baynit for would make a tinker ill! An I dont know whose dam column Im in, nor where were trekkin nor why. Ive trekked from the Vaal to the Orange once-- From the Vaal to the greasy Pongolo once-- (Or else it was called the Zambesi once)-- For now I am M. I. That is what we are known as--we are the push you require For outposts all night under freezin, an rear-guard all day under fire. Anything ot or unwholesome? Anything dusty or dry? Borrow a bunch of Ikonas! Trot out the ---- M. I.! Our Sergeant-Majors a subaltern, our Captains a Fusilier-- Our Adjutants late of Somebodys Orse, an a Melbourne auctioneer; But you couldnt spot us at arf a mile from the crackest caval-ry. They used to talk about Lancers once, Hussars, Dragoons, an Lancers once, Elmets, pistols, an carbines once, But now we are M. I. That is what we are known as--we are the orphans they blame For beggin the loan of an ead-stall an makin a mount to the same: Cant even look at an orselines but some one goes bellerin Hi! Ere comes a burglin Ikona! Footsack you ---- M. I.! Were trekkin our twenty miles a day an bein loved by the Dutch, But we dont hold on by the mane no more, nor lose our stirrups--much; An we scout with a senior man in charge where the oly white flags fly. We used to think they were friendly once, Didnt take any precautions once (Once, my ducky, an only once!) But now we are M. I. That is what we are known as--we are the beggars that got Three days to learn equitation, an six months o bloomin well trot! Cow-guns, an cattle, an convoys--an Mister De Wet on the fly-- We are the rollin Ikonas! We are the ---- M. I.! The new fat regiments come from home, imaginin vain V.C.s (The same as our talky-fighty men which are often Number Threes[2]), But our words o command are Scatter an Close an Let your wounded lie. We used to rescue em noble once,-- Givin the range as we raised em once, Gettin em killed as we saved em once-- But now we are M. I. That is what we are known as--we are the lanterns you view After a fight round the kopjes, lookin for men that we knew; Whistlin an callin together, altin to catch the reply:-- Elp me! O elp me, Ikonas! This way, the ---- M. I.! I wish my mother could see me now, a-gatherin news on my own, When I ride like a General up to the scrub and ride back like Tod Sloan, Remarkable close to my orses neck to let the shots go by. We used to fancy it risky once (Called it a reconnaissance once), Under the charge of an orfcer once, But now we are M. I. That is what we are known as--that is the song you must say When you want men to be Mausered at one and a penny a day; We are no five-bob colonials--we are the omemade supply, Ask for the London Ikonas! Ring up the ---- M. I.! I wish myself could talk to myself as I left im a year ago; I could tell im a lot that would save im a lot on the things that e ought to know! When I think o that ignorant barrack-bird, it almost makes me cry. I used to belong in an Army once (Gawd! what a rum little Army once), Red little, dead little Army once! But now I am M. I.! That is what we are known as--we are the men that have been Over a year at the business, smelt it an felt it an seen. We ave got old of the needful--_you_ will be told by and by; Wait till youve eard the Ikonas, spoke to the old M. I.! _Mount--march, Ikonas! Stand to your orses again! Mop off the frost on the saddles, mop up the miles on the plain. Out go the stars in the dawnin, up goes our dust to the sky, Walk--trot, Ikonas! Trek jou,[3] the old M. I.!_ [1] Number according to taste and service of audience. [2] Horse-holders when in action, and therefore generally under cover. [3] Get ahead. COLUMNS [Page 72] (MOBILE COLUMNS OF THE LATER WAR) Out o the wilderness, dusty an dry (_Time, an igh time to be trekkin again!_) Oo is it eads to the Detail Supply? (_A section, a pompom, an six undred men._) Ere comes the clerk with is lantern an keys (_Time, an igh time to be trekkin again!_) Surplus of everything--draw what you please _For the section, the pompom, an six undred men_. What are our orders an where do we lay? (_Time, an igh time to be trekkin again!_) You came after dark--you will leave before day, _You section, you pompom, an six undred men!_ Down the tin street, alf awake an unfed, Ark to em blessin the Genral in bed! Now by the church an the outspan they wind-- Over the ridge an its all lef beind _For the section_, etc. Soon they will camp as the dawns growin grey, Roll up for coffee an sleep while they may-- _The section_, etc. Read their ome letters, their papers an such, For theyll move after dark to astonish the Dutch _With a section_, etc. Untin for shade as the long hours pass, Blankets on rifles or burrows in grass, _Lies the section_, etc. Dossin or beatin a shirt in the sun, Watching chameleons or cleanin a gun, _Waits the section_, etc. With nothin but stillness as far as you please, An the silly mirage stringin islands an seas _Round the section_, etc. So they strips off their hide an they grills in their bones, Till the shadows crawl out from beneath the pore stones _Towards the section_, etc. An the Mauser-bird stops an the jackals begin, An the orse-guard comes up and the Gunners ook in _As a int to the pompom an six undred men_.... Off through the dark with the stars to rely on-- (Alpha Centauri an somethin Orion) _Moves the section_, etc. Same bloomin ole which the ant-bear as broke, Same bloomin stumble an same bloomin joke _Down the section_, etc. Same which is right? where the cart-tracks divide, Same give it up from the same clever guide _To the section_, etc. Same tumble-down on the same idden farm, Same white-eyed Kaffir oo gives the alarm _Of the section_, etc. Same shootin wild at the end o the night, Same flyin tackle an same messy fight _By the section_, etc. Same ugly iccup an same orrid squeal, When its too dark to see an its too late to feel _In the section_, etc. (Same batch of prisoners, airy an still, Watchin their comrades bolt over the ill _From the section_, etc.) Same chilly glare in the eye of the sun As e gets up displeasured to see what was done _By the section_, etc. Same splash o pink on the stoep or the kraal, An the same quiet face which as finished with all _In the section, the pompom, an six undred men_. _Out o the wilderness, dusty an dry (Time, an igh time to be trekkin again!) Oo is it eads to the Detail Supply? (A section, a pompom, an six undred men.)_ THE PARTING OF THE COLUMNS [Page 77] ... On the --th instant a mixed detachment of colonials left ---- for Cape Town, there to rejoin their respective homeward-bound contingents, after fifteen months service in the field. They were escorted to the station by the regular troops in garrison and the bulk of Colonel ----s column, which has just come in to refit, preparatory to further operations. The leave-taking was of the most cordial character, the men cheering each other continuously.--_Any Newspaper._ Weve rode and fought and ate and drunk as rations come to hand. Together for a year and more around this stinkin land: Now you are goin home again, but we must see it through. We neednt tell we liked you well. Good-bye--good luck to you! You ad no special call to come, and so you doubled out, And learned us how to camp and cook an steal a horse and scout: Whatever game we fancied most, you joyful played it too, And rather better on the whole. Good-bye--good luck to you! There isnt much we avent shared, since Kruger cut and run, The same old work, the same old skoff, the same old dust and sun; The same old chance that laid us out, or winked an let us through; The same old Life, the same old Death. Good-bye--good luck to you! Our blood as truly mixed with yours--all down the Red Cross train, Weve bit the same thermometer in Bloemingtyphoidtein. Weve ad the same old temprature--the same relapses too, The same old saw-backed fever-chart. Good-bye--good luck to you! But twasnt merely this an that (which all the world may know), Twas how you talked an looked at things which made us like you so. All independent, queer an odd, but most amazin new, My word! you shook us up to rights. Good-bye--good luck to you! Think o the stories round the fire, the tales along the trek-- O Calgary an Wellinton, an Sydney and Quebec; Of mine an farm, an ranch an run, an moose an cariboo, An parrots peckin lambs to death! Good-bye--good luck to you! Weve seen you ome by word o mouth, weve watched your rivers shine, Weve eard your bloomin forests blow of eucalip and pine; Your young, gay countries north an south, we feel we own em too, For they was made by rank an file. Good-bye--good luck to you! Well never read the papers now without inquirin first For word from all those friendly dorps where you was born an nursed. Why, Dawson, Galle, an Montreal--Port Darwin--Timaru, Theyre only just across the road! Good-bye--good luck to you! Good-bye!--So-long! Dont lose yourselves--nor us, nor all kind friends, But tell the girls your side the drift were comin--when it ends! Good-bye, you bloomin Atlases! Youve taught us somethin new: The worlds no bigger than a kraal. Good-bye--good luck to you! TWO KOPJES [Page 82] (MADE YEOMANRY) Only two African kopjes, Only the cart-tracks that wind Empty and open between em, Only the Transvaal behind; Only an Aldershot column Marching to conquer the land ... Only a sudden and solemn Visit, unarmed, to the Rand. Then scorn not the African kopje, The kopje that smiles in the heat, The wholly unoccupied kopje, The home of Cornelius and Piet. You can never be sure of your kopje, But of this be you blooming well sure, A kopje is always a kopje, And a Boojer is always a Boer! Only two African kopjes, Only the vultures above, Only baboons--at the bottom, Only some buck on the move; Only a Kensington draper Only pretending to scout ... Only bad news for the paper, Only another knock-out. Then mock not the African kopje, And rub not your flank on its side, The silent and simmering kopje, The kopje beloved by the guide. _You can never be_, etc. Only two African kopjes, Only the dust of their wheels, Only a bolted commando, Only our guns at their heels ... Only a little barb-wire, Only a natural fort, Only by sections retire, Only regret to report! Then mock not the African kopje, Especially when it is twins, One sharp and one table-topped kopje, For thats where the trouble begins. _You can never be_, etc. Only two African kopjes Baited the same as before-- Only weve had it so often, Only were taking no more ... Only a wave to our troopers, Only our flanks swinging past, Only a dozen voorloopers, Only _we_ve learned it at last! Then mock not the African kopje, But take off your hat to the same. The patient, impartial old kopje, The kopje that taught us the game! For all that we knew in the Columns, And all theyve forgot on the Staff, We learned at the fight o Two Kopjes, Which lasted two years an a half. _O mock not the African kopje, Not even when peace has been signed-- The kopje that isnt a kopje-- The kopje that copies its kind. You can never be sure of your kopje, But of this be you blooming well sure, That a kopje is always a kopje. And a Boojer is always a Boer!_ THE INSTRUCTOR [Page 86] (CORPORALS) At times when under cover I ave said, To keep my spirits up an raise a laugh, Earin im pass so busy over-ead-- Old Nickel Neck, oo isnt on the Staff-- _Theres one above is greater than us all_. Before im I ave seen my Colonel fall, An watched im write my Captains epitaph, So that a long way off it could be read-- He _as_ the knack o makin men feel small-- Old Whistle Tip, oo isnt on the Staff. There is no sense in fleein (I ave fled), Better go on an do the belly-crawl, An ope ell it some other man instead Of you e seems to unt so speshual-- Fitzy van Spitz, oo isnt on the Staff. An thus in memrys gratis biograph, Now that the show is over, I recall The peevish voice an oary mushroom ead Of im we owned was greater than us all, Oo give instruction to the quick an the dead-- The Shudderin Beggar not upon the Staff. BOOTS [Page 88] (INFANTRY COLUMNS OF THE EARLIER WAR) Were foot--slog--slog--slog--sloggin over Africa! Foot--foot--foot--foot--sloggin over Africa-- (Boots--boots--boots--boots, movin up and down again!) Theres no discharge in the war! Seven--six--eleven--five--nine-an-twenty mile to-day-- Four--eleven--seventeen--thirty-two the day before-- (Boots--boots--boots--boots, movin up and down again!) Theres no discharge in the war! Dont--dont--dont--dont--look at whats in front of you (Boots--boots--boots--boots, movin up an down again); Men--men--men--men--men go mad with watchin em, An theres no discharge in the war. Try--try--try--try--to think o something different-- Oh--my--God--keep--me from goin lunatic! (Boots--boots--boots--boots, movin up an down again!) Theres no discharge in the war. Count--count--count--count--the bullets in the bandoliers; If--your--eyes--drop--they will get atop o you (Boots--boots--boots--boots, movin up and down again)-- Theres no discharge in the war! We--can--stick--out--unger, thirst, an weariness, But--not--not--not--not the chronic sight of em-- Boots--boots--boots--boots, movin up an down again, An theres no discharge in the war! Taint--so--bad--by--day because o company, But night--brings--long--strings o forty thousand million Boots--boots--boots--boots, movin up an down again. Theres no discharge in the war! I--ave--marched--six--weeks in Ell an certify It--is--not--fire--devils dark or anything But boots--boots--boots, movin up an down again, An theres no discharge in the war! THE MARRIED MAN [Page 91] (RESERVIST OF THE LINE) The bachelor e fights for one As joyful as can be; But the married man dont call it fun, Because e fights for three-- For Im an Er an It (An Two an One makes Three) E wants to finish is little bit, An e wants to go ome to is tea! The bachelor pokes up is ead To see if you are gone; But the married man lies down instead, An waits till the sights come on. For Im an Er an a hit (Direct or ricochee) E wants to finish is little bit, An e wants to go ome to is tea. The bachelor will miss you clear To fight another day; But the married man, e says No fear! E wants you out of the way Of Im an Er an It (An is road to is farm or the sea), E wants to finish is little bit, An e wants to go ome to is tea. The bachelor e fights is fight An stretches out an snores; But the married man sits up all night-- For e dont like out o doors: Ell strain an listen an peer An give the first alarm-- For the sake o the breathin es used to ear An the ead on the thick of is arm. The bachelor may risk is ide To elp you when youre downed; But the married man will wait beside Till the ambulance comes round. Ell take your ome address An all youve time to say, Or if e sees theres ope, ell press Your artry alf the day-- For Im an Er an It (An One from Three leaves Two), For e knows you wanted to finish your bit, An e knows oos wantin you. Yes, Im an Er an It (Our oly One in Three), Were all of us anxious to finish our bit, An we want to get ome to our tea! Yes, It an Er an Im, Which often makes me think The married man must sink or swim An--e cant afford to sink! Oh Im an It an Er Since Adam an Eve began, So Id rather fight with the bachel_er_ An be nursed by the married man! LICHTENBERG [Page 95] (N.S.W. CONTINGENT) Smells are surer than sounds or sights To make your heart-strings crack-- They start those awful voices o nights That whisper, Old man, come back. That must be why the big things pass And the little things remain, Like the smell of the wattle by Lichtenberg, Riding in, in the rain. There was some silly fire on the flank And the small wet drizzling down-- There were the sold-out shops and the bank And the wet, wide-open town; And we were doing escort-duty To somebodys baggage-train, And I smelt wattle by Lichtenberg-- Riding in, in the rain. It was all Australia to me-- All I had found or missed: Every face I was crazy to see, And every woman Id kissed: All that I shouldnt ha done, God knows! (As He knows Ill do it again), That smell of the wattle round Lichtenberg, Riding in, in the rain! And I saw Sydney the same as ever, The picnics and brass-bands; And the little homestead on Hunter River And my new vines joining hands. It all came over me in one act Quick as a shot through the brain-- With the smell of the wattle round Lichtenberg, Riding in, in the rain. I have forgotten a hundred fights, But one I shall not forget-- With the raindrops bunging up my sights And my eyes bunged up with wet; And through the crack and the stink of the cordite (Ah Christ! My country again!) The smell of the wattle by Lichtenberg, Riding in, in the rain! STELLENBOSH [Page 98] (COMPOSITE COLUMNS) The General eard the firin on the flank, An e sent a mounted man to bring im back The silly, pushin persons name an rank Ood dared to answer Brother Boers attack. For there might ave been a serious engagement, An e might ave wasted alf a dozen men; So e ordered im to stop is operations round the kopjes, An e told im off before the Staff at ten! And it all goes into the laundry, But it never comes out in the wash, Ow were sugared about by the old men (Eavy-sterned amateur old men!) That amper an inder an scold men For fear o Stellenbosh! The General ad produced a great effect, The General ad the country cleared--almost; The General ad no reason to expect, And the Boers ad us bloomin well on toast! For we might ave crossed the drift before the twilight, Instead o sitting down an takin root; But we was not allowed, so the Boojers scooped the crowd, To the last survivin bandolier an boot. The General saw the farmouse in is rear, With its stoep so nicely shaded from the sun; Sez e, Ill pitch my tabernacle ere, An e kept us muckin round till e ad done. For e might ave caught the confluent pneumonia From sleepin in his gaiters in the dew; So e took a book an dozed while the other columns closed, And ----s commando out an trickled through! The General saw the mountain-range ahead, With their elios showin saucy on the eight, So e eld us to the level ground instead, An telegraphed the Boojers wouldnt fight. For e might ave gone an sprayed em with a pompom, Or e might ave slung a squadron out to see-- But e wasnt takin chances in them igh an ostile kranzes-- He was markin time to earn a K.C.B. The General got is decorations thick (The men that backed is lies could not complain), The Staff ad D.S.O.s till we was sick, An the soldier--ad the work to do again! For e might ave known the District was a otbed, Instead of andin over, upside-down, To a man oo ad to fight alf a year to put it right, While the General went an slandered im in town! An it all went into the laundry, But it never came out in the wash. We were sugared about by the old men (Panicky, perishin old men) That amper an inder an scold men For fear o Stellenbosh! HALF-BALLAD OF WATERVAL [Page 102] When by the labour of my ands Ive elped to pack a transport tight With prisoners for foreign lands, I aint transported with delight. I know its only just an right, But yet it somehow sickens me, For I ave learned at Waterval The meanin of captivity. Beind the pegged barb-wire strands, Beneath the tall electric light, We used to walk in bare-ead bands, Explainin ow we lost our fight. An that is what theyll do to-night Upon the steamer out at sea, If I ave learned at Waterval The meanin of captivity. _They_ll never know the shame that brands-- Black shame no livin down makes white, The mockin from the sentry-stands, The womens laugh, the gaolers spite. _We_ are too bloomin much polite, But that is ow Id ave us be... Since I ave learned at Waterval The meanin of captivity. Theyll get those draggin days all right, Spent as a foreigner commands, An orrors of the locked-up night, With Ells own thinkin on their ands. Id give the gold o twenty Rands (If it was mine) to set em free ... For I ave learned at Waterval The meanin of captivity! PIET [Page 104] (REGULAR OF THE LINE) I do not love my Empires foes, Nor call em angels; still, What _is_ the sense of atin those Oom you are paid to kill? So, barrin all that foreign lot Which only joined for spite, Myself, Id just as soon as not Respect the man I fight. Ah there, Piet!--is trousies to is knees, Is coat-tails lyin level in the bullet-sprinkled breeze; E does not lose is rifle an e does not lose is seat, Ive known a lot o people ride a dam sight worse than Piet! Ive eard im cryin from the ground Like Abels blood of old, An skirmished out to look, an found The beggar nearly cold; Ive waited on till e was dead (Which couldnt elp im much), But many grateful things es said To me for doin such. Ah there, Piet! whose time as come to die, Is carcase past rebellion, but is eyes inquirin why. Though dressed in stolen uniform with badge o rank complete, Ive known a lot o fellers go a dam sight worse than Piet. An when there wasnt aught to do But camp and cattle-guards, Ive fought with im the ole day through At fifteen undred yards; Long afternoons o lyin still, An earin as you lay The bullets swish from ill to ill Like scythes among the ay. Ah there, Piet!--beind is stony kop, With is Boer bread an biltong, an is flask of awful Dop; Is Mauser for amusement an is pony for retreat, Ive known a lot o fellers shoot a dam sight worse than Piet. Hes shoved is rifle neath my nose Before Id time to think, An borrowed all my Sunday cloes An sent me ome in pink; An I ave crept (Lord, ow Ive crept!) On ands an knees Ive gone, And spoored and floored and caught and kept An sent him to Ceylon! Ah there, Piet!--youve sold me many a pup, When week on week alternate it was you an me ands up! But though I never made _you_ walk man-naked in the eat, Ive known a lot of fellows stalk a dam sight worse than Piet. From Plewmans to Marabastad, From Ookiep to De Aar, Me an my trusty friend ave ad, As you might say, a war; But seein what both parties done Before e owned defeat, I aint more proud of avin won, Than I am pleased with Piet. Ah there, Piet!--picked up beind the drive! The wonder wasnt ow e fought, but ow e kep alive, With nothin in is belly, on is back, or to is feet-- Ive known a lot o men behave a dam sight worse than Piet. No more Ill ear is rifle crack Along the blockouse fence-- The beggars on the peaceful tack, Regardless of expense. For countin what e eats an draws, An gifts an loans as well, Es gettin alf the Earth, because E didnt give us Ell! Ah there, Piet! with your brand-new English plough, Your gratis tents an cattle, an your most ungrateful frow. Youve made the British taxpayer rebuild your country-seat-- Ive known some pet battalions charge a dam sight less than Piet. WILFUL-MISSING [Page 110] There is a world outside the one you know, To which for curiousness Ell cant compare-- It is the place where wilful-missings go, As we can testify, for we are there. You may ave read a bullet laid us low, That we was gathered in with reverent care And buried proper. But it was not so, As we can testify, for we are there. They cant be certain--faces alter so After the old aasvogels ad is share; The uniforms the mark by which they go-- And--aint it odd?--the one we best can spare. We might ave seen our chance to cut the show-- Name, number, record, an begin elsewhere-- Leavin some not too late-lamented foe One funeral--private--British--for is share. We may ave took it yonder in the Low Bush-veldt that sends men stragglin unaware Among the Kaffirs, till their columns go, An they are left past call or count or care. We might ave been your lovers long ago, Usbands or children--comfort or despair. Our death (an burial) settles all we owe, An why we done it is our own affair. Marry again, and we will not say no, Nor come to bastardise the kids you bear: Wait on in ope--youve all your life below Before youll ever ear us on the stair. There is no need to give our reasons, though Gawd knows we all ad reasons which were fair; But other people might not judge em so, And now it doesnt matter what they were. What man can size or weigh anothers woe? There are some things too bitter ard to bear. Suffice it we ave finished--Domino! As we can testify, for we are there, In the side-world where wilful-missings go. UBIQUE [Page 113] There is a word you often see, pronounce it as you may-- You bike, you bykwe, ubbikwe--alludin to R.A. It serves Orse, Field, an Garrison as motto for a crest, An when youve found out all it means Ill tell you alf the rest. Ubique means the long-range Krupp beind the low-range ill-- Ubique means youll pick it up an while you do stand still. Ubique means youve caught the flash an timed it by the sound. Ubique means five gunners ash before youve loosed a round. Ubique means Blue Fuse, an make the ole to sink the trail. Ubique means stand up an take the Mausers alf-mile ail. Ubique means the crazy team not God nor man can old. Ubique means that orses scream which turns your innards cold! Ubique means Bank, Olborn, Bank--a penny all the way-- The soothin, jingle-bump-an-clank from day to peaceful day. Ubique means Theyve caught De Wet, an now we shant be long. Ubique means I much regret, the beggars goin strong! Ubique means the tearin drift where, breech-blocks jammed with mud, The khaki muzzles duck an lift across the khaki flood. Ubique means the dancing plain that changes rocks to Boers. Ubique means mirage again an shellin all outdoors. Ubique means Entrain at once for Grootdefeatfontein! Ubique means Off-load your guns--at midnight in the rain! Ubique means More mounted men. Return all guns to store. Ubique means the R.A.M.R. Infantillery Corps! Ubique means that warnin grunt the perished linesman knows, When oer is strung an sufferin front the shrapnel sprays is foes; An as their firin dies away the usky whisper runs From lips that avent drunk all day: The Guns! Thank Gawd, the Guns! Extreme, depressed, point-blank or short, end-first or anyow, From Colesberg Kop to Quaggas Poort--from Ninety-Nine till now-- By what Ive eard the others tell an I in spots ave seen, Theres nothin this side Eaven or Ell Ubique doesnt mean! THE RETURN [Page 117] (ALL ARMS) Peace is declared, an I return To Ackneystadt, but not the same; Things ave transpired which made me learn The size and meanin of the game. I did no more than others did, I dont know where the change began; I started as a average kid, I finished as a thinkin man. _If England was what England seems, An not the England of our dreams, But only putty, brass, an paint, Ow quick wed drop er!_ But she aint! Before my gappin mouth could speak I eard it in my comrades tone; I saw it on my neighbours cheek Before I felt it flush my own. An last it come to me--not pride, Nor yet conceit, but on the ole (If such a term may be applied), The makins of a bloomin soul. Rivers at night that cluck an jeer, Plains which the moonshine turns to sea, Mountains that never let you near, An stars to all eternity; An the quick-breathin dark that fills The ollows of the wilderness, When the wind worries through the ills-- These may ave taught me more or less. Towns without people, ten times took, An ten times left an burned at last; An starvin dogs that come to look For owners when a column passed; An quiet, omesick talks between Men, met by night, you never knew Until--is face--by shellfire seen-- Once--an struck off. They taught me too. The days lay-out--the mornin sun Beneath your at-brim as you sight; The dinner-ush from noon till one, An the full roar that lasts till night; An the pore dead that look so old An was so young an hour ago, An legs tied down before theyre cold-- These are the things which make you know. Also Time runnin into years-- A thousand Places left beind-- An Men from both two emispheres Discussin things of every kind; So much more near than I ad known, So much more great than I ad guessed-- An me, like all the rest, alone-- But reachin out to all the rest! So ath it come to me--not pride, Nor yet conceit, but on the ole (If such a term may be applied), The makins of a bloomin soul. But now, discharged, I fall away To do with little things again.... Gawd, oo knows all I cannot say, Look after me in Thamesfontein! _If England was what England seems, An not the England of our dreams, But only putty, brass, an paint, Ow quick wed chuck er!_ But she aint! RECESSIONAL [Page 121] (1897) God of our fathers, known of old, Lord of our far-flung battle-line, Beneath whose awful Hand we hold Dominion over palm and pine-- Lord God of Hosts, be with us yet, Lest we forget--lest we forget! The tumult and the shouting dies; The captains and the kings depart: Still stands Thine ancient sacrifice, An humble and a contrite heart. Lord God of Hosts, be with us yet, Lest we forget--lest we forget! Far-called, our navies melt away; On dune and headland sinks the fire: Lo, all our pomp of yesterday Is one with Nineveh and Tyre! Judge of the Nations, spare us yet, Lest we forget--lest we forget! If, drunk with sight of power, we loose Wild tongues that have not Thee in awe, Such boastings as the Gentiles use, Or lesser breeds without the Law-- Lord God of Hosts, be with us yet, Lest we forget--lest we forget! For heathen heart that puts her trust In reeking tube and iron shard, All valiant dust that builds on dust, And guarding, calls not Thee to guard, For frantic boast and foolish word-- Thy Mercy on Thy People, Lord! Amen. Printed by T. and A. CONSTABLE, Printers to His Majesty at the Edinburgh University Press