



A SONG OF THE ENGLISH


    _Fair is our lot--O goodly is our heritage!
    (Humble ye, my people, and be fearful in your mirth!)
      For the Lord our God Most High
      He hath made the deep as dry,
    He hath smote for us a pathway to the ends of all the Earth!_

    _Yea, though we sinned--and our rulers went from righteousness--
    Deep in all dishonour though we stained our garments' hem.
      Oh be ye not dismayed,
      Though we stumbled and we strayed,
    We were led by evil counsellors--the Lord shall deal with them!_

    _Hold ye the Faith--the Faith our Fathers sealèd us;
    Whoring not with visions--overwise and over-stale.
      Except ye pay the Lord
      Single heart and single sword,
    Of your children in their bondage shall He ask them treble-tale!_

    _Keep ye the Law--be swift in all obedience--
    Clear the land of evil, drive the road and bridge the ford.
      Make ye sure to each his own
      That he reap where he hath sown;
    By the peace among Our peoples let men know we serve the Lord!_

       *       *       *       *       *

    _Hear now a song--a song of broken interludes--
    A song of little cunning; of a singer nothing worth.
      Through the naked words and mean
      May ye see the truth between
    As the singer knew and touched it in the ends of all the Earth!_




THE COASTWISE LIGHTS


    Our brows are bound with spindrift and the weed is on our knees;
    Our loins are battered 'neath us by the swinging, smoking seas.
    From reef and rock and skerry--over headland ness, and voe--
    The Coastwise Lights of England watch the ships of England go!

    Through the endless summer evenings, on the lineless, level floors;
    Through the yelling Channel tempest when the siren hoots and roars--
    By day the dipping house-flag and by night the rocket's trail--
    As the sheep that graze behind us so we know them where they hail.

    We bridge across the dark and bid the helmsman have a care,
    The flash that wheeling inland wakes his sleeping wife to prayer;
    From our vexed eyries, head to gale, we bind in burning chains
    The lover from the sea-rim drawn--his love in English lanes.

    We greet the clippers wing-and-wing that race the Southern wool;
    We warn the crawling cargo-tanks of Bremen, Leith, and Hull;
    To each and all our equal lamp at peril of the sea--
    The white wall-sided warships or the whalers of Dundee!

[Illustration: THE COASTWISE LIGHTS OF ENGLAND.
    Come up, come in from Eastward, from the guardports of the Morn!
    Beat up, beat in from Southerly, O gipsies of the Horn!
    Swift shuttles of an Empire's loom that weave us, main to main,
    The Coastwise Lights of England give you welcome back again!]

    Come up, come in from Eastward, from the guard-ports of the Morn!
    Beat up, beat in from Southerly, O gipsies of the Horn!
    Swift shuttles of an Empire's loom that weave us, main to main,
    The Coastwise Lights of England give you welcome back again!

    Go, get you gone up-Channel with the sea-crust on your plates;
    Go, get you into London with the burden of your freights!
    Haste, for they talk of Empire there, and say, if any seek,
    The Lights of England sent you and by silence shall ye speak!




THE SONG OF THE DEAD


[Illustration: THE SONG OF THE DEAD.
    Follow after--we are waiting, by the trails that we lost,
    For the sounds of many footsteps, for the tread of a host.]


    _Hear now the Song of the Dead--in the North by the torn berg-edges--
    They that look still to the Pole, asleep by their hide-stripped
                    sledges.
    Song of the Dead in the South--in the sun by their skeleton horses,
    Where the warrigal whimpers and bays through the dust of the sere
                    river-courses._

    _Song of the Dead in the East--in the heat-rotted jungle hollows,
    Where the dog-ape barks in the kloof--in the brake of the
                    buffalo-wallows.
    Song of the Dead in the West--in the Barrens, the waste that
                    betrayed them,
    Where the wolverine tumbles their packs from the camp and the
                    grave-mound they made them;
        Hear now the Song of the Dead!_


I

    We were dreamers, dreaming greatly, in the man-stifled town;
    We yearned beyond the sky-line where the strange roads go down.
    Came the Whisper, came the Vision, came the Power with the Need,
    Till the Soul that is not man's soul was lent us to lead.
    As the deer breaks--as the steer breaks--from the herd where
                    they graze,
    In the faith of little children we went on our ways.

    Then the wood failed--then the food failed--then the last water dried--
    In the faith of little children we lay down and died.
    On the sand-drift--on the veldt-side--in the fern-scrub we lay,
    That our sons might follow after by the bones on the way.
    Follow after--follow after! We have watered the root,
    And the bud has come to blossom that ripens for fruit!

    Follow after--we are waiting, by the trails that we lost,
    For the sounds of many footsteps, for the tread of a host.
    Follow after--follow after--for the harvest is sown:
    By the bones about the wayside ye shall come to your own!

[Illustration: FOLLOW AFTER.
    Follow after--follow after--for the harvest is sown:
    By the bones about the wayside ye shall come to your own!]

    _When Drake went down to the Horn
      And England was crowned thereby,
    'Twixt seas unsailed and shores unhailed
      Our Lodge--our Lodge was born
      (And England was crowned thereby!)_

    _Which never shall close again
      By day nor yet by night,
    While man shall take his life to stake
      At risk of shoal or main
      (By day nor yet by night)_

    _But standeth even so
      As now we witness here,
    While men depart, of joyful heart
      Adventure for to know
      (As now bear witness here!)_


II

    We have fed our sea for a thousand years
      And she calls us, still unfed,
    Though there's never a wave of all her waves
      But marks our English dead:
    We have strawed our best to the weed's unrest
      To the shark and the sheering gull.
    If blood be the price of admiralty,
      Lord God, we ha' paid in full!

[Illustration: LORD GOD, WE HA' PAID IN FULL!
    If blood be the price of admiralty,
      Lord God, we ha' paid in full!]

    There's never a flood goes shoreward now
      But lifts a keel we manned;
    There's never an ebb goes seaward now
      But drops our dead on the sand--
    But slinks our dead on the sands forlore,
      From the Ducies to the Swin.
    If blood be the price of admiralty,
    If blood be the price of admiralty,
      Lord God, we ha' paid it in!

    We must feed our sea for a thousand years,
      For that is our doom and pride,
    As it was when they sailed with the _Golden Hind_,
      Or the wreck that struck last tide--
    Or the wreck that lies on the spouting reef
      Where the ghastly blue-lights flare.
    If blood be the price of admiralty,
    If blood be the price of admiralty,
    If blood be the price of admiralty,
      Lord God, we ha' bought it fair!




THE DEEP-SEA CABLES


    The wrecks dissolve above us; their dust drops down from afar--
    Down to the dark, to the utter dark, where the blind white
                    sea-snakes are.
    There is no sound, no echo of sound, in the deserts of the deep,
    Or the great grey level plains of ooze where the shell-buried
                    cables creep.

    Here in the womb of the world--here on the tie-ribs of earth
      Words, and the words of men, flicker and flutter and beat--
    Warning, sorrow and gain, salutation and mirth--
      For a Power troubles the Still that has neither voice nor feet.

    They have wakened the timeless Things; they have killed their
                    father Time;
      Joining hands in the gloom, a league from the last of the sun.
    Hush! Men talk to-day o'er the waste of the ultimate slime,
      And a new Word runs between: whispering, 'Let us be one!'




THE SONG OF THE SONS


    One from the ends of the earth--gifts at an open door--
    Treason has much, but we, Mother, thy sons have more!
    From the whine of a dying man, from the snarl of a wolf-pack freed,
    Turn, and the world is thine. Mother, be proud of thy seed!
    Count, are we feeble or few? Hear, is our speech so rude?
    Look, are we poor in the land? Judge, are we men of The Blood?

[Illustration: WE THAT WERE BRED OVERSEAS.
    Those that have stayed at thy knees, Mother, go call them in--
    We that were bred overseas wait and would speak with our kin.
    Not in the dark do we fight--haggle and flout and gibe;
    Selling our love for a price, loaning our hearts for a bribe.]

    Those that have stayed at thy knees, Mother, go call them in--
    We that were bred overseas wait and would speak with our kin.
    Not in the dark do we fight--haggle and flout and gibe;
    Selling our love for a price, loaning our hearts for a bribe.
    Gifts have we only to-day--Love without promise or fee--
    Hear, for thy children speak, from the uttermost parts of the sea!




THE SONG OF THE CITIES


BOMBAY

    Royal and Dower-royal, I the Queen
      Fronting thy richest sea with richer hands--
    A thousand mills roar through me where I glean
      All races from all lands.

[Illustration: BOMBAY.
    Royal and Dower-royal, I the Queen
      Fronting thy richest sea with richer hands--
    A thousand mills roar through me where I glean
      All races from all lands.]


CALCUTTA

    Me the Sea-captain loved, the River built,
      Wealth sought and Kings adventured life to hold.
    Hail, England! I am Asia--Power on silt,
      Death in my hands, but Gold!


MADRAS

    Clive kissed me on the mouth and eyes and brow,
      Wonderful kisses, so that I became
    Crowned above Queens--a withered beldame now,
      Brooding on ancient fame.


RANGOON

    Hail, Mother! Do they call me rich in trade?
      Little care I, but hear the shorn priest drone,
    And watch my silk-clad lovers, man by maid,
      Laugh 'neath my Shwe Dagon.


SINGAPORE

    Hail, Mother! East and West must seek my aid
      Ere the spent gear may dare the ports afar.
    The second doorway of the wide world's trade
      Is mine to loose or bar.


HONG-KONG

    Hail, Mother! Hold me fast; my Praya sleeps
      Under innumerable keels to-day.
    Yet guard (and landward), or to-morrow sweeps
      Thy warships down the bay!


HALIFAX

    Into the mist my guardian prows put forth,
      Behind the mist my virgin ramparts lie,
    The Warden of the Honour of the North,
      Sleepless and veiled am I!


QUEBEC AND MONTREAL

    Peace is our portion. Yet a whisper rose,
      Foolish and causeless, half in jest, half hate.
    Now wake we and remember mighty blows,
      And fearing no man, wait!


VICTORIA

    From East to West the circling word has passed,
      Till West is East beside our land-locked blue;
    From East to West the tested chain holds fast,
      The well-forged link rings true!


CAPETOWN

    Hail! Snatched and bartered oft from hand to hand,
      I dream my dream, by rock and heath and pine,
    Of Empire to the northward. Ay, one land
      From Lion's Head to Line!


MELBOURNE

    Greeting! Nor fear nor favour won us place,
      Got between greed of gold and dread of drouth,
    Loud-voiced and reckless as the wild tide-race
      That whips our harbour-mouth!


SYDNEY

    Greeting! My birth-stain have I turned to good;
      Forcing strong wills perverse to steadfastness;
    The first flush of the tropics in my blood,
      And at my feet Success!


BRISBANE

    The northern stirp beneath the southern skies--
      I build a Nation for an Empire's need,
    Suffer a little, and my land shall rise,
      Queen over lands indeed!


HOBART

    Man's love first found me; man's hate made me Hell;
      For my babes' sake I cleansed those infamies.
    Earnest for leave to live and labour well,
      God flung me peace and ease.


AUCKLAND

    Last, loneliest, loveliest, exquisite, apart--
      On us, on us the unswerving season smiles
    Who wonder 'mid our fern why men depart
      To seek the Happy Isles!




ENGLAND'S ANSWER


    Truly ye come of The Blood; slower to bless than to ban;
    Little used to lie down at the bidding of any man.
    Flesh of the flesh that I bred, bone of the bone that I bare;
    Stark as your sons shall be--stern as your fathers were.
    Deeper than speech our love, stronger than life our tether,
    But we do not fall on the neck nor kiss when we come together.

[Illustration: MY ARM IS NOTHING WEAK, MY STRENGTH IS NOT GONE BY.
    Deeper than speech our love, stronger than life our tether,
    But we do not fall on the neck nor kiss when we come together.
    My arm is nothing weak, my strength is not gone by;
    Sons, I have borne many sons, but my dugs are not dry.]

    My arm is nothing weak, my strength is not gone by;
    Sons, I have borne many sons, but my dugs are not dry.
    Look, I have made ye a place and opened wide the doors,
    That ye may talk together, your Barons and Councillors--
    Wards of the Outer March, Lords of the Lower Seas,
    Ay, talk to your grey mother that bore you on her knees!--

    That ye may talk together, brother to brother's face--
    Thus for the good of your peoples--thus for the Pride of the Race.
    Also, we will make promise. So long as The Blood endures,
    I shall know that your good is mine: ye shall feel that my
                    strength is yours:
    In the day of Armageddon, at the last great fight of all,
    That Our House stand together and the pillars do not fall.

    Draw now the threefold knot firm on the ninefold bands,
    And the Law that ye make shall be law after the rule of your lands.
    This for the waxen Heath, and that for the Wattle-bloom,
    This for the Maple-leaf, and that for the southern Broom.
    The Law that ye make shall be law and I do not press my will,
    Because ye are Sons of The Blood and call me Mother still.

    Now must ye speak to your kinsmen and they must speak to you,
    After the use of the English, in straight-flung words and few.
    Go to your work and be strong, halting not in your ways,
    Baulking the end half-won for an instant dole of praise.
    Stand to your work and be wise--certain of sword and pen,
    Who are neither children nor Gods, but men in a world of men!


_Edinburgh: T. and A. Constable, Printers to His Majesty_

       *       *       *       *       *




Transcriber's Notes


One typo corrected: burred for buried.

Our peoples (page 15) left with capital O as in book text.





End of Project Gutenberg's A Song of the English, by Rudyard Kipling



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A SONG OF THE ENGLISH ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


